Product engineers: How to use product-market fit surveys to actually improve your app (with examples) (#7341)
PostHog/posthog.com: contents/product-engineers/pmf-surveys.md

At a high-level, here are the steps you need to follow to do the same for your app (we'll dive a [case study of Superhuman below](#case-study-superhuman)):

1. Send the PMF survey to your users.

2. Identify your best users i.e., those who answered "very disappointed".

3. Paint a clear picture of who these people are by creating a [user persona](/product-engineers/how-to-create-user-personas) of them.

4. Find out why they love your product. Do this by asking `"What is the main benefit you receive from our product"` as follow-up question in your survey.

5. Next, direct your attention to the "somewhat disappointed" users. Focus only on those who match the user persona you created in `step 3` *and* responded the same to "main benefit" question in `step 4`.

6. It's clear that your app resonates with them, but something is holding them back from *loving* it. Find out what's missing or annoying for them. Do this by asking `How can we improve our app for you?`. 

7. Reprioritize your roadmap to address their issues and ship your changes.

8. Repeat the process to convert your "somewhat disappointed" users into your best users.

> ![How to improve your app with PMF survey](../images/blog/pmf-surveys/pmf-survey-steps.png)

Author: I'm a bit unsure of this image. I like it to some extent, but I think it may too hard to parse (perhaps because of too much text)

---

> date: 2023-11-29

Reviewer: ```suggestion
date: 2024-01-09
```

title: "How to drive growth with product-market fit surveys"
author:
  - lior-neu-ner
featuredImage: ../images/blog/posthog-marketing/marketing-hog.jpg
featuredImageType: full
tags:
  - Product engineers
  - User research
---

*"How would you feel if you could no longer use our product?"* a.k.a the product-market fit survey.

> This is perhaps the most well-known question in SaaS circles. [Superhuman](https://superhuman.com) famously used it to catapult themselves to over 50,000 paying customers and a whopping **$20 million** in revenue. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is perhaps the most well-known survey question in startup circles. [Superhuman](https://superhuman.com) famously used it to catapult themselves to over 50,000 paying customers and a whopping **$20 million** in revenue. 
```

In this post we show you just that. We break down [Superhuman's product-market fit engine](https://review.firstround.com/how-superhuman-built-an-engine-to-find-product-market-fit) into an easy step-by-step guide you can follow as well as dive into two case studies.

## A very brief introduction to PMF surveys

> If you're already familiar with product-market fit surveys, skip to the [next section](#how-to-drive-product-market-fit-with-pmf-surveys).

Created by entrepreneur Sean Ellis, the core question (among others) it asks is:

"How would you feel if you could no longer use [product name]?"

- a) Very disappointed
- b) Somewhat disappointed
- c) Not disappointed

Your PMF score is the percentage of total responses that are "very disappointed".

For example, let's say you survey `100` people. `50` people respond with "very disappointed", your PMF score would be '50 / 100 = 50%`.

Based on his research of 100+ startups, Ellis believes 40% answering "very disappointed" is a strong signal of product-market fit.

![How to calculate PMF score](../images/blog/pmf-surveys/pmf-score.png)

## How to drive product-market fit with PMF surveys

> ### Step 1: Survey informed users

Reviewer: I don't understand what you mean by "survey informed users"? 
```suggestion
### Step 1: Survey your users
```

The first step is to learn more about your customers and what they think of your app. Do this by creating a [survey](/surveys) with the following questions:

> 1. How would you feel if you could no longer use our product?
>    
> 2. What type of people do you think would most benefit from it?
> 
> 3. What is the main benefit you receive from it?
> 
> 4. How can we improve our app for you?

Reviewer: I don't like this question as it forces users to think of who beyond themself would benefit from the app, basically asking them to do market research for you, which I don't think works well.

I would drop this one.
```suggestion
1. How would you feel if you could no longer use our product?

2. What is the main benefit you receive from it?

3. How can we improve our app for you?
```

Each question plays an important and specific role – we'll explain how later. 

In the meantime, to receive the best feedback, send the survey to users who have recently had meaningful interactions with your app. This means users that have:

- experienced the core value-prop of your product.
- used your product at least twice.
- used your product in the last two weeks.

You can begin analyzing the results once you have at least 30 responses. 

> ### Step 2: Study your best customers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Step 2: Create a user persona of your best users
```

Start by examining the users who would be "very disappointed" if they could no longer use your product. There are two things you need to learn about them:

1. Who they are

2. Why they love your product

> To find the answers, look at their responses to the questions `What is the main benefit you receive from our product?` and `What type of people do you think would most benefit from it?`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To find the answers, look at their responses to the questions `What is the main benefit you receive from our product?`
```

> Then, use this information to create a [user persona](/product-engineers/how-to-create-user-personas) of your best supporters. Users who match this persona are the ones you need to improve your app for and you should focus your attention solely on them. In the next step we explain how to do this.

Reviewer: > Users who match this persona are the ones you need to improve your app for and you should focus your attention solely on them.

It's not clear why. Maybe so you can improve survey results which mean your overall product is improving? Trickle down improvements to non-best supporters?

![Personas of survey responders](../images/blog/pmf-surveys/personas.png)
<Caption>Focus your attention only on users that match your user persona</Caption>

### Step 3: Find your "on-the-fence" users

> Direct your attention to the users who responded with "somewhat disappointed". In particular, focus on the ones that:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, direct your attention to the users who responded with "somewhat disappointed". In particular, focus on the ones that:
```

> - match the user persona you created in the previous step, and

Reviewer: Isn't the user persona above defined by answering "very disappointed"?
```suggestion
- are most similar the user persona you created in the previous step, and
```

- gave similar responses like your best supporters when asked about the main benefit they receive from your app.

> It's clear that these users are seeing the value in your app, but something is holding them back from becoming passionate users. Usually, only one or two things are in their way, so these users will be the easiest to convert into fanatics who champion your product.

Reviewer: What are some examples of things in their way? Missing features, bugs, pricing?
```suggestion
It's clear that these users are seeing the value in your app, but something is holding them back from becoming passionate users. Usually, only one or two things are in their way, so these users will be the easiest to convert into champions of your product.
```

> To find out what their problems are, look at their response to the question `"How can we improve our app for you?" and make a note of the common themes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To find out what their problems are, look at their response to the question "How can we improve our app for you?" and make a note of the common themes.
```

### Step 4: Reprioritize your roadmap

> Now that you understand your app's most important benefits and missing features, the next step is to reprioritize your roadmap. 

Reviewer: The last two steps didn't have to do with understanding "your app's most important benefits and missing features", they were about understanding users it seems. I feel like you're missing a step or part of a step here. 

Maybe adjusting the titles of step 3 and 4 would help.

You need to continue improving the app's main benefits while also addressing the problems your users mentioned. Rahul Vohra, founder of Superhuman, explains why this is important:

<BorderWrapper>
<Quote
    imageSource=""
    size= "md"
    name= "Rahul Vohra"
    title= "Founder & CEO, Superhuman"
    quote={`"If you only double down on what users love, your product-market fit score won't increase. If you only address what holds users back, your competition will likely overtake you."`}
/>
</BorderWrapper>

> When prioritizing your roadmap, you don't need to overthink things. Stack-ranking your projects by assigning each one a label of `low/medium/high` for effort and impact is sufficient (or you can even [add dollar estimates](/product-engineers/fixing-growth-problems#problem-2-prioritization)). This will give you a clear idea of which projects to work on first.

Reviewer: How do you evaluate impact?

I am working on a related newsletter, I said "At a lower level, individual teams also have an idea of what all the potential features they can build are. This is formed based on their principles, user feedback, metrics,  experience, and opinions."

> ### Step 5: Repeat

Reviewer: What about building the features users want?

Keep repeating the process from steps 1-4. Each time you do, you'll learn more about what you need to improve and how to prioritize it.

As you start shipping your improvements, continue tracking your PMF survey score. It should begin to improve as you gradually convert your on-the-fence users into loyal advocates. 

Lastly, to keep your product team focused on a single goal, consider making your PMF score their primary OKR.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> ### Frequently Asked Questions
> 
> #### How many responses do I need?
> 
> Ellis recommends a minimum of 30 responses for the survey to become directionally useful. However, he also mentions that 100 or more responses is ideal.
> 
> #### What do I do about users who answer "not disappointed"?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Frequently Asked Questions

### How many responses do I need?

Ellis recommends a minimum of 30 responses for the survey to become directionally useful. However, he also mentions that 100 or more responses is ideal.

### What do I do about users who answer "not disappointed"?
```

Respectfully ignore them! 

> It's likely that there are many aspects of your app that are bothering or not benefiting them. Thus, they are essentially a lost cause. This is why you should instead focus on the "somewhat disappointed" users mentioned in step 3.

Reviewer: I get what you're trying to say, but calling any users "lost causes" feels bad.
```suggestion
It's likely that there are many aspects of your app that are bothering or not benefiting them. Having all these issues does not help you prioritize though. This is why you should instead focus on the "somewhat disappointed" users and their issues mentioned in step 3.
```

1. **Segmented users:** They assigned user personas to everyone who responded (e.g., founder, engineer, customer success) and created an [Ideal Customer Profile](/founders/creating-ideal-customer-profile) based on the users that responded "very disappointed". 

2. **Doubled down on what their ideal customers love:** People loved how fast Superhuman was and how quickly it helped them get their work done. Superhuman made sure to continue improving on this. They built more features to increase email efficiency – such as "Snippets": the ability to automatically type phrases, paragraphs, or whole emails. 

3. **Converted on-the-fence users:** They focused on the users who loved Superhuman's speed but still responded with "somewhat disappointed". They learned that these users need a mobile app, and so they built it. Their users loved them for it!

4. **Repeated the process:** Superhuman continued to survey users, tracking progress towards the 40% mark. The score became the primary OKR for the product team and, after three quarters, Superhuman increased their score to 58%.

> ## Case study: Slack

Reviewer: Do we have a case study that actually used it? If not, I think we should drop these.

1. The Superhuman case study is weaved throughout the main article, and could maybe be done more. 
2. Only including Superhuman and Slack makes the PMF survey feel not useful, only the team who invented it actually used it. Slack didn't even use it, it was just run by someone. It feels like proof it isn't worth doing that no one has done one or had results.
